The monologue is near the conclusion of Blade Runner, where detective Rick Deckard (played by Harrison Ford) has been ordered to track down and kill the rogue replicant Roy Batty, who is near the end of his fixed four-year lifespan and is now dying. 
Batty ends up chasing Deckard to the rooftops in the midst of a heavy downpour of rain, where Deckard misses a jump between the rooftops and ends up hanging precariously. 
Batty ultimately pulls Deckard up to safety despite knowing Deckard would kill him, moments before Batty's own death. 
Reflecting on his experiences and imminent mortality, Batty says, with dramatic pauses between each statement:

I've seen things you people wouldn't believe. 
Attack ships on fire off the shoulder of Orion. 
I watched C-beams glitter in the dark near the Tannhäuser Gate. 
All those moments will be lost in time, like tears in rain. 
Time to die.

In the documentary Dangerous Days: Making Blade Runner, Hauer, director Ridley Scott, and screenwriter David Peoples confirm that Hauer significantly modified the "Tears in Rain" speech. 
In his autobiography, Hauer said he merely cut the original scripted speech by several lines, adding only, "All those moments will be lost in time, like tears in rain".[10] 
One earlier version in Peoples' draft screenplays was:

I've known adventures, seen places you people will never see, I've been Offworld and back… frontiers! 
I've stood on the back deck of a blinker bound for the Plutition Camps with sweat in my eyes watching stars fight on the shoulder of Orion... 
I’ve felt wind in my hair, riding test boats off the black galaxies and seen an attack fleet burn like a match and disappear. 
I've seen it, felt it...![11]

And, the original script, before Hauer's rewrite, was:

I've seen things... seen things you little people wouldn't believe. 
Attack ships on fire off the shoulder of Orion bright as magnesium... 
I rode on the back decks of a blinker and watched C-beams glitter in the dark near the Tannhäuser Gate. 
All those moments... they'll be gone.[12]

Hauer described this as "opera talk" and "hi-tech speech" with no bearing on the rest of the film, so he "put a knife in it" the night before filming, without Scott's knowledge.[13] 
After filming the scene with Hauer's version, crew-members applauded, with some even in tears.[8] 
In an interview with Dan Jolin, Hauer said that these final lines showed that Batty wanted to "make his mark on existence ... the replicant in the final scene, by dying, shows Deckard what a real man is made of".[14] 